# A Comparative Study of Loss Functions: Traffic Predictions in Regular and Congestion Scenarios

This repository reproduces the results reported in [A Comparative Study of Loss Functions: Traffic Predictions in Regular and Congestion Scenarios](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15464).

## Requirements
Dependency can be installed using the following command:
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

If you run into issues while installing `tables`, try the following stackoverflow [solution](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/73029883/could-not-find-hdf5-installation-for-pytables-on-m1-mac).

## Retraining all the models
Under the four folders of the form `$MODEL(-quantile)` (`D2STGNN`, `D2STGNN-quantile`, `Graph-WaveNet`, `Graph-WaveNet-quantile`), we provide the adapted source code for each model to reproduce the results in this paper. 
- You can follow the instructions in the `README.md` under each of these four folders to retrain the models. After training, the best model checkpoints in training will be saved under `archive`, and the predicted traffic speed in the test set will be saved under `result`.
- Quantile loss requires a slightly different model output structure than the other loss functions. `-quantile` means that the we made changes to the code in order to adapt to the Quantile Loss implemented in [Quantifying Uncertainty in Deep Spatiotemporal Forecasting, KDD 2021](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3447548.3467325).
- All the other loss functions (`mae`, `mse`, `mae-focal`, `mse-focal`, `bmse1`, `bmse9`, `huber`, `kirtosis`, `Gumbel`) are implementeed under `$MODEL`. For `Graph-WaveNet`, the loss functions are implemented under `util.py`; for `D2STGNN`, the loss functions are implemented under `models/losses.py`.

## [Dataset](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/13tFUPaVaQ9osSdeTxnlOSShfqAqOd6DL?usp=share_link)
Download the `METR-LA` and `PEMS-BAY` folders. Both folders contain 
 - two subfolders `GraphWaveNet` and `D2STGNN`. These two folders contain 
    - the best model checkpoints in training, under `models` folder; and
    - all the predicted traffic speed in the test set in `$MODEL-$LOSS.pkl`.
    - These can also be generated by retraining the models, as described in the last section. 
 - Source data files: `METR-LA/metr-la.h5`, `METR-LA/graph_sensor_locations.csv`, `PEMS-BAY/pems-bay.h5`, `PEMS-BAY/graph_sensor_locations_bay.csv`.
 - `change_points.pkl`, `change_point_intervals.pkl` and `congested.pkl`. These can also be generated following the instructions below.

## Metric Computation

To run our metric computation, we need `change_point_intervals.pkl` and `congested.pkl` for the `METR-LA` and `PEMS-BAY` datasets. 

The `change_points.pkl` contains all the identified change points in the time series of the historical traffic speed of each of the sensor location. The `change_point_intervals.pkl` incorporates two-time steps preceding and following each identified change point. To regenerated all the change points in `METR-LA` and `PEMS-BAY` datasets, run
```
python find_change_points.py --path $DATA_PATH
```
Replace `$DATA_PATH` by `METR-LA` or `PEMS-BAY`. For example, you can run
```
python find_change_points.py --path METR-LA
```
Please note that due to the computational cost of offline changepoint identification algorithms, this can take a few hours to run. 

The `congested.pkl` contains all the sensor locations with significant bimodal pattern in the histogram of the historical traffic speed. To regenerate this file for `METR-LA` and `PEMS-BAY` datasets, run
```
python bimodal.py --path $DATA_PATH
```
Replace `$DATA_PATH` by `METR-LA` or `PEMS-BAY`. For example, you can run
```
python bimodal.py --path METR-LA
```

If you would like to visualize all the bimodal distributions, as well as an interactive map as shown in Figure 2 of the paper, you can run `bimodal-LA.ipynb` or `bimodal-bay.ipynb`.

Finally, run
```
python metrics.py --model GraphWaveNet --dataset METR-LA
python metrics.py --model D2STGNN --dataset METR-LA
python metrics.py --model GraphWaveNet --dataset PEMS-BAY
python metrics.py --model D2STGNN --dataset PEMS-BAY
```
to generate all the tables in the paper.
